Test Automation with Renode (#115)
memfault/interrupt: _drafts/test-automation-renode.md

---
title: Firmware Testing with Renode and Github Actions
description: TODO
author: tyler
image:
---

Automated firmware testing on real embedded hardware is what every hardware company
strives to build. The mission is to repeatedly verify that changes to firmware being merged
into master and shipped to customers will not cause catastrophic failures like power regressions or bootloops. 

The problem with automated firmware testing with real hardware is that it's
**hard**. Not only does the system require a stable firmware to build
on top of, but it will also require extra hardware, like flashers and power supplies, and software to orchestrate
the tests and capture results.

An alternative to building a complicated orchestration system for automated

> tests is to use the popular hardware emulator project, Renode, and it's built-in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tests is to use the popular hardware emulator project, Renode, and its built-in
```

Robot Framework integration. By using Renode in conjunction with Github Actions, we can ensure that every pull-request and commit to master passes all our tests. 

<!-- excerpt start -->

In this post, I cover what it takes to build a simple firmware for use with
Renode, how to build and administer tests with Robot Framework, and how to run
these tests within Github's continuous integration system.

<!-- excerpt end -->

_Like Interrupt? [Subscribe](http://eepurl.com/gpRedv) to get our latest posts
straight to your mailbox_

{:.no_toc}

## Table of Contents

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
* auto-gen TOC:
{:toc}

## Automation Testing for Firmware

Test automation is the practice of testing software and/or hardware in a
repeatable and scalable way where expected values are compared against actual
values.

> There are various forms of test automation, and they are usually run within or
> controlled by a continuous integration system, such as Jenkins, Github Actions,
> or CircleCI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are various forms of test automation, and they are usually run under a 
continuous integration system, such as Jenkins, Github Actions, or CircleCI.
```

> - Software Unit Tests - Isolated tests which perform tests on a single module.
>   Usually run on the host machine and sometimes on an emulator or real device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Software Unit Tests - Isolated tests which exercise a single module.
  Usually run on the host machine and sometimes on an emulator or real device.
```

> - Integration Tests - Tests that perform tests on a collection of modules that
>   interact with each other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Integration Tests - Tests that exercise a collection of modules that
  interact with each other
```

on hardware, but the complexity increases exponentially as more hardware is thrown into the mix.

A middle ground between host-run tests and hardware tests is testing on an
emulator which emulates the real hardware as much as possible. Renode, by Antmicro, has become
our favorite emulator at Memfault, and its list of support boards is continually
growing[^renode_boards]. Renode emulates many peripherals of the board,
including the UART, SPI, I2C, RAM, ROM, and GPIO's.

## When to Use Emulators for Testing

TODO

## Using a Shell for Testing

Whether tests are being run within Renode or on real hardware, there should be a
way to easily run tests on a device.

A common approach is to use a CLI-based shell over serial, which we wrote about
in our post [Building a Tiny CLI Shell for Tiny
Firmware]({% post_url 2020-06-09-firmware-shell %}#integration--automated-tests).

The idea is relatively simple.

1. Create a test which will execute a series of shell commands on a device.
2. After each command or series of commands, the results will be compared
   against expected values.
3. At the end of the test run, the harness determines whether the test was
   successful or not.

> Thankfully for us, Renode has sever utilities and helpers built-in that we can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thankfully for us, Renode has several utilities and helpers built-in that we can
```

take advantage of.

## Setup

### Example Repo

All the code in this post was written for the STM32F429 MCU by ST Micro. While
the examples run fine on the STM32F429i discovery board, they were developed in
Renode, a popular MCU emulation platform.

You can find the complete code example for this blog post in a separate
[Github repository](https://github.com/memfault/interrupt-renode-test-automation).

```
$ git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/memfault/interrupt-renode-test-automation.git
```

### Toolchain

I used the following tools to build my firmware:

- GCC 8.3.1 / GNU Arm Embedded Toolchain as our compiler[^gnu_toolchain]
- GNU Make 4.2.1 as the build system

Running automated tests with Renode, unfortunately, requires Python 2.7. To keep
things simple for me, I decided to use a Conda environment to keep this entire
environment isolated.

```
$ conda create -n renode
$ conda activate renode
$ conda install -c conda-forge -c memfault \
      python=2.7 gcc-arm-none-eabi make=4.2.1

$ which arm-none-eabi-gcc
/Users/tyler/miniconda3/envs/renode/bin/arm-none-eabi-gcc
```

Perfect, I now have `arm-none-eabi-gcc` and `python2.7` in my path.

> > Want to learn more about Conda? Check out my previous post on using [Conda > >

Reviewer 2: Might drop the extra ">>" in the url name

> > Want to learn more about Conda? Check out my previous post on using [Conda > >
> > environments for embedded > >
> > development]({% post_url 2020-01-07-conda-developer-environments %}).
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Want to learn more about Conda? Check out my previous post on using [Conda
> environments for embedded development]({% post_url 2020-01-07-conda-developer-environments %}).

```

It turns out the Renode team packages the application in a
[Renode Conda package](https://anaconda.org/antmicro/renode), but at the time of
writing this post, not all platforms had the latest version released (v1.9,
released in March). For that reason, I chose to install it locally for this
post.

### Renode & Robot Framework

To install Renode, I've found the best instructions to be on the
[Renode Github Page](https://github.com/renode/renode#installation). In the
example repo, I've created a `start.sh` script which points to my local Renode
installation on my Mac. If you are using another platform, you'll have to update
this script to point to your own Renode start script.

```bash
#!/bin/sh

sh /Applications/Renode.app/Contents/MacOS/macos_run.command renode-config.resc
```

> To run Robot Framework alongside Renode, we'll also need to clone the Renode

Reviewer 2: First real time mentioning robot framework I believe. Might try to quickly mention what it is

    // Configure shell
    sShellImpl shell_impl = {
      .send_char = usart_putc,
    };
    shell_boot(&shell_impl);

    char c;
    while (1) {
        c = usart_getc();
        shell_receive_char(c);
    }

    return 0;
}
```

The supporting `*_setup()` calls and their implementations can be found in the
other `.c` files in
[`src/`](https://github.com/memfault/interrupt-renode-test-automation/tree/master/src).

We can build our example firmware by invoking Make.

```
$ make -j4
Building libopencm3
  GENHDR  include/libopencm3/stm32/f4/irq.json
  [...]
  AR      libopencm3_stm32f4.a
  LD    build/renode-example.elf
```

Now we have our `renode-example.elf` file which we can load into Renode.

```
$ ./start.sh
```

And then we see our firmware's shell in the UART window of Renode.

![](img/test-automation-renode/renode-start.png)

We can interact with it exactly as if it was connected to our computer over USB
serial! This would have made writing and testing the firmware for my [Tiny
Shell]({% post_url 2020-06-09-firmware-shell %}) post **much** easier. I'm glad
I took the time now to learn Renode for the next time.

## Anatomy of a Robot Framework Test

> Now that we've verified that the firmware works within Renode, it's now time to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that we've verified that the firmware works within Renode, it's time to
```

Output:  /Users/tyler/dev/interrupt-renode-test-automation/test_results/robot_output.xml
Log:     /Users/tyler/dev/interrupt-renode-test-automation/test_results/log.html
Report:  /Users/tyler/dev/interrupt-renode-test-automation/test_results/report.html
Tests finished successfully :)
```

Awesome. Our simple test was able to launch the firmware, execute the `ping`
command, receive a `PONG` response, and generate a report.

We can also add another test to this same file to test our `help` command, and
we can use multiple `Wait For Line On Uart`, one after the other. We can append
the following to the end of `test_basic.robot`:

```robot
*** Test Cases ***
Help Menu
    Start Test

    Wait For Prompt On Uart     ${SHELL_PROMPT}
    Write Line To Uart          help

    # Expect two lines
    Wait For Line On Uart       help: Lists all commands      timeout=2
    Wait For Line On Uart       ping: Prints PONG             timeout=2
```

This covers the basic functionality for tests, but there is **so much more**
that can be done with this infrastructure.

## More Robot Framework Tips & Tricks

The best place to start for inspiration of the various features of Renode's

> integration with Robot Framework is to search around the Internet. I've search

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
integration with Robot Framework is to search around the Internet. I've searched
```

we might have written at the time would measure the available heap space after
all of the tests had finished.

```robot
*** Test Cases ***
High Water Mark
    Start Test

    Wait For Prompt On Uart         ${SHELL_PROMPT}
    Write Line To Uart              heap_free

    ${p}=  Wait For Line On Uart    (\\d+)     treatAsRegex=true  timeout=2
    ${i}=  Convert To Integer       ${p.groups[0]}

    # Ensure we have 5000 bytes free at the end of the tests
    Should Be True                  5000 < ${i}
```

In our automated tests, we did similar checks to make sure that our performance,
power usage, stack, and heap usage were always within acceptable limits.

### Line Endings

If your shell uses carriage returns as line endings, make sure to add the
following option when creating the tester:

```
    Create Terminal Tester    ${UART}  endLineOption=TreatCarriageReturnAsEndLine
```

### Tags & Documentation

You can add a **Tags** and **Documentation** attribute to each test, which will
help bucket your tests up into logical groups and help developers know what each
test is doing.

```robot
*** Test Cases ***
Command

>     [Documentation]             Some command

Reviewer 2: Maybe a screenshot of where the  "Documentation" shows up? Don't believe I see anything below

          echo test, and deploy your project.
```

### Building Firmware in CI

It's time to adapt the sample above to make it build our firmware. First, we'll
need to make sure that the `checkout` routine clones submodules as well, since
our example repo has a couple of them.

```yaml
jobs:
  build_and_test:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest

    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v2
        with: #
          submodules: true # CHANGED
```

Next, we'll want to download and configure the ARM embedded toolchain since it
isn't installed by default. Thankfully, there is already an Action,
[`fiam/arm-none-eabi-gcc`](https://github.com/fiam/arm-none-eabi-gcc), that we
can use to install the toolchain for us.

```yaml
    steps:
    [...]

    # Get the arm-non-eabi-gcc toolchain
    - name: Install arm-none-eabi-gcc
      uses: fiam/arm-none-eabi-gcc@v1
      with:
          release: '9-2019-q4'
```

The last thing we need to do is to invoke `make` itself to start the build.

```yaml
    steps:
    [...]

    - name: Build Firmware
      run: make -j4
```

### Running Renode in CI

The next thing we need to do is to get Renode working in CI. For the example,

> this is as simple as running `./docker-test.sh` since the Github Actions Ubuntu

Reviewer: You don't include any additional details about `docker-test.sh`. What is it? Where does it come from? Why do I need it? Where do I find a link to the full file?

> [Click here to view it](/misc/test-automation-renode/log.html).

## Debugging Failing Tests in CI

Tests are going to fail in CI, and it's probably a good thing, as that's what CI
is for. But, it would be a pain to guess and check how to fix issues that only
occur in CI. Thankfully, Renode has the ability to capture the state of the
system, save it to a file, and load it after-the-fact[^renode_state_save].

It does this using the monitor commands `Save` and `Load`. Wouldn't it be cool
if we could call the `Save` command in CI for failing tests and then locally run
`Load` in Renode to get the exact state of the device at the time of failure?
Yes it would be.

Renode has part of this
[built-in](https://github.com/renode/renode/blob/05377ef375daa3d5ea0de12633d27bf26e20b3b3/src/Renode/RobotFrameworkEngine/renode-keywords.robot#L77-L86).
Unfortunately, this is yet another piece of functionality that doesn't exist in
the current public release, so I've
[copied the code](https://github.com/memfault/interrupt-renode-test-automation/blob/master/tests/common.robot)
(and overrode the snapshot save location) so that these snapshots get uploaded

> into our Github Actions artifacts!

Reviewer: Did you have to configure Github actions to do this? Is there a special path that is used for artifacts?

I've download an example ZIP archive from one of the builds from GitHub and
extracted it.

```
$ tree .
test_results
├── log.html
├── logs.txt
├── report.html
├── robot_output.xml
├── snapshots
│   └── test-basic-Trigger_Fault.fail.save
└── test-basic.xml
```

The `test-basic-Trigger_Fault.fail.save` file is a snapshot from a test and
shell command that forces a crash.

> ```c

Reviewer: This is backwards. You should first say "I created this command which causes a crash", and *then* discuss the zip archive.

int cli_command_fault(int argc, char *argv[]) {
    void (*g_bad_func_call)(void) = (void (*)(void))0x20000002;
    g_bad_func_call();
    return 0;
}
```

Let's load it up into Renode & GDB and see what it looks like. I've created
another script to help with loading these save files into Renode,

> `load-save.sh`.

Reviewer: Same as the other script. Where do I find it? What does it do? Why do I need it?

```
$ ./load-save.sh test_results/snapshots/test-basic-Trigger_Fault.fail.save
Loaded monitor commands from: ./scripts/monitor.py
Monitor available in telnet mode on port 1234
machine-0: GDB server with all CPUs started on port :3333
```

We see that the GDB port on 3333 is up and running, so let's attach to that
port. Don't forget to include the ELF file (which is also saved in the GitHub
build artifacts).

```
$ arm-none-eabi-gdb-py --eval-command="target remote :3333" --se renode-example.elf
[...]
(gdb) bt
#0  blocking_handler () at ../../cm3/vector.c:104
#1  <signal handler called>
#2  0x20000002 in rcc_ahb_frequency ()
#3  0x08000252 in cli_command_fault (argc=1, argv=0x2000ff74) at src/app_shell_commands.c:24
#4  0x08000528 in prv_process () at src/shell/src/shell.c:113
#5  0x080005ec in shell_receive_char (c=13 '\r') at src/shell/src/shell.c:147
#6  0x080001e0 in main () at src/app.c:29
```

> That looks right! `0x20000002` was the bogus address I used which caused a

Reviewer: In general this section is super cool, but a bit confusing as currently written.

UsageFault, and we can tell it came from the CLI command `fault`.

> ## Improving The Renode Tooling

Reviewer: I would change this to "Use Renode in Headless Mode" or "Renode without a GUI". People will be Googling for that.

> ## Improving The Renode Tooling

Reviewer 2: neat!

To improve my workflow with Renode, I needed to do something about the
Mono-emulated terminal windows that were spawned with Renode. Although not
entirely documented, it's quite easy to never have to use these terminal windows
directly and you can instead attach to Renode using Telnet. This enables you to

> have use iTerm2, your native clipboard, tmux, etc.

Reviewer: Wait! You forgot the most important part: how do I do this? What's this `start-headless.sh` script you mention? I want to run Renode headless, found your post, but didn't find the answer :'(
